Simulator Developer Guide
=========================

In general, the only documentation for most of the code is the source code
itself, and the code comments therein.  However, here we provide an overview of
how the simulator works, and tips for getting started with simulator
development.


Overview
--------

This simulator is built using Intel's [Pin](http://www.intel.com/software/pintool),
which is a dynamic binary instrumentation framework.
But you don't need expertise in Pin or binary instrumentation
to use the simulator or add features to it.
You can think of Pin as a virtual machine to run x86 binaries,
just as the JVM is a virtual machine to run Java bytecode.
So Pin lets us decode x86 binary instructions, in software, before executing them.
Pin additionally lets you register for certain functions to be called
when certain instruction types are encountered in an application.
(This is called "instrumenting" the application binary, hence "binary instrumentation".)

For example, the simulator instruments any instruction that accesses memory.
When, say, a store is about to execute, the simulated system state is updated on the fly.
This includes checking and updating detailed core and cache models,
possibly creating cache-coherence messages in the on-chip network model,
and determining at what cycle the store operation would complete.
Swarm simulations must also check for conflicts and save the old value
(from the memory address being overwritten) to an undo log.
After the simulator takes all these actions, the store can finally execute
and update the application's memory state.

A single simulation thread sequentially executes instructions from all simulated threads,
as well as all other microarchitectural events in the simulated system.
The simulation switches between simulating different system components at very fine granularity.
This allows us to perform faithful cycle-accurate simulation,
by executing all microarchitectural events in the proper virtual time order.
The simulator is event-driven, with a priority queue
(implemented in [driver.cpp](../sim/driver.cpp))
driving the selection of events to be processed.
The simulation uses [libspin](https://github.com/SwarmArch/libspin)
to efficiently perform this sequential execution with frequent context switches.

Most of the code in the simulator that interfaces with Pin to interact with
instructions in the application binary are in [sim.cpp](../sim/sim.cpp).
To implement new instructions, we use a hack:
instead of coming up with new x86 opcodes,
we repurpose an otherwise valid x86 no-op instruction by adding new side effects.
For example, the simulator calls `HandleMagicOp()` which performs various actions
when executing an instruction where `isMagicOpIns()` returns true (i.e., `xchg %rcx, %rcx`).
This approach lets us use inline assembly to make ordinary GCC or Clang
generate binaries with "new" instructions, and existing debuggers and disassemblers
won't complain when decoding binaries with these "new" instructions.
The downside is incorrect simulation of any application that happens to
use `xchg %rcx, %rcx` as a no-op, but we've seen no occurrences of this.  🤞

The simulator implements many models of microarchitectural features.
Swarm adds new hardware features in the form of task units,
virtual time arbiters, and conflict detection in the cache hierarchy.
The code refers to each of Swarm's task units
(which combines a task queue and a commit queue) as a `ROB`,
and these are implemented in [rob.cpp](../sim/rob.cpp).
Virtual time arbiters are in [gvt_arbiter.cpp](../sim/gvt_arbiter.cpp).
The logic for detecting conflicts and deciding what tasks should abort
lives in the [conflicts](../sim/conflicts/) subdirectory.
When reading Swarm code, you might find lingering references to "PLS",
which was an early codename for Swarm.

### Deep Dive: How does `swarm::run()` work?

Let's assume you already understand [how to use](UserGuide.mdown) `swarm::run()`.
We can use it as a case study to see how software-hardware interactions
are implemented with this simulator.  `swarm::run` is implemented in
[swarm_runtime.h](https://github.com/SwarmArch/runtime/blob/master/include/swarm/impl/swarm_runtime.h#L38),
which calls `launch_threads` in
[hwmisc.h](https://github.com/SwarmArch/runtime/blob/master/include/swarm/impl/hwmisc.h)
to spawn a bunch of pthreads, one for each simulated core or hardware thread,
and each thread runs the function `pls_worker`.
`pls_worker` does a bunch of setup at the start of each thread,
but the main action is in its call `sim_task_dequeue_runloop`,
which is implemented as a bunch of hand-coded assembly in
[hooks.h](https://github.com/SwarmArch/runtime/blob/master/include/swarm/hooks.h).

In this hand-coded assembly, there's an `xchg %rdx, %rdx` instruction
(which is the task-dequeue instruction) at label 1,
and the very next instruction is label 2.
Before the dequeue instruction, there's a `MAGIC_OP_TASK_DEQUEUE_SETUP`
that passes the address of label 1 in %rsi and %rdi, and the address of label 2 in %rdx.
The implementation of `MAGIC_OP_TASK_DEQUEUE_SETUP` in [sim.cpp](../sim/sim.cpp)
stores the value from %rsi and %rdi (the address of the dequeue instruction)
in `curThread->finishPc` and `curThread->abortPc`,
and stores value of %rdx (the address of the following instruction)
in `curThread->donePc`.

At runtime, each time the `xchg %rdx, %rdx` executes,
the simulator runs the function `HandleDequeueMagicOp` in [sim.cpp](../sim/sim.cpp).
The first time it runs, it saves the thread's original %rsp (stack pointer) value
to `curThread->rspCheckpoint`. Then, in the normal case that the task-dequeue succeeds
in obtaining a task to run, `HandleDequeueMagicOp` proceeds to call `DispatchTaskToContext`
to begin the task's execution.  The implementation of `DispatchTaskToContext`
sets the values of several registers according to the task's arguments,
and sets %rip (the program counter) to the task's function pointer value,
causing execution to jump to the task function.

A task can finish execution by executing another dequeue instruction.
(There is no separate finish-task instruction.)
`DispatchTaskToContext` also places the value from `curThread->finishPc`
(which is the address of the dequeue instruction in `sim_task_dequeue_runloop`)
at the top of the thread's stack before executing a task function,
so a task function can simply return, with a return address that jumps
to execute the dequeue instruction again.
(Similarly, if a task aborts while it's executing, then
the simulator will call `AbortTaskOnThread` to set %rip to `curThread->abortPc`,
which is also the address of the dequeue instruction.)
That's how each thread continues to dequeue and execute any available tasks.

When `HandleDequeueMagicOp` attempts to dequeue a task from the task unit,
there might be no available task, in which case the thread blocks,
so the simulator will not execute any more actions from that thread.
Later, if some tasks become available, the `ROB` has condition variables
named `rqNotEmpty` and `rqHasRunnable` that get notified,
which may wake up blocked threads so they attempt to re-execute the dequeue instruction,
which might succeed in obtaining a task.

When a `ROB` has no tasks remaining, it will report
a local virtual time (LVT) of infinity to the virtual time arbiter(s).
When all tasks have finished execution and committed, so there is nothing left
in any task or commit queue, then every tile will report a LVT of infinity,
so the arbiter(s) will broadcast that the global virtual time (GVT) has reached infinity.
At that point that `ROB::terminate` can return `true`.  All threads will be woken up,
and they'll try to execute the dequeue instruction one final time.  This final execution of
`HandleDequeueMagicOp` restores the value from `curThread->rspCheckpoint` to %rsp
and sets %rip to `curThread->donePc`, which is address of the instruction after
the dequeue instruction in `sim_task_dequeue_runloop`. At this point,
`sim_task_dequeue_runloop` can finally run to completion and return to `pls_worker`,
which each thread finishes executing.  `launch_threads` joins on all its pthreads,
so it returns to `swarm::run` only after the workers finish.  Finally, `swarm::run`
returns to serial execution of whatever remains in the application program.


Debugging
---------

TODO: Explain how to use the simulator's interactive mode.

The simulator, as a Pintool, can also be debugged by passing the
`-pause_tool [seconds]` option to Pin. This option pauses Pin for the
specified number of seconds as you attach GDB to the Pintool.

Before launching the simulator, prepare GDB to attach to the Pintool. Fill
in `[pid]` with the process ID provided by Pin as you launch the
simulator.
```bash
$ gdb -p [pid]
```
or
```bash
$ gdb
GNU gdb (Ubuntu 7.7.1-0ubuntu5~14.04.3) 7.7.1
Copyright (C) 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
 ...
No symbol table is loaded.  Use the "file" command.
(gdb) attach [pid]
```

If using tmux or screen, split the pane horizontally, as Pin will print a
long command to load debugging information.

Supply the `-pause_tool 10` option to the `PIN_OPTIONS` environment
variable and launch the simulator:
```bash
$ PIN_OPTIONS="-pause_tool 10" ./build/opt/sim/sim -config sample.cfg -- ./build/opt/tests/swarm/bfs 2000 8
[sim] Invoked with arguments: -config sample.cfg -- ./build/opt/tests/swarm/bfs 2000 8
[sim] Built Mon Jan 21 16:29:48 EST 2019 (rev debugging-readme:4307:d6a2c1b:clean)
Pausing for 10 seconds to attach to process with pid 54976
To load the tool's debug info to gdb use:
   add-symbol-file .../build/opt/sim/speculator_fast.so 0x7fc7097a7450 -s .data 0x7fc70a2a5020 -s .bss 0x7fc70a2a6a00
```
Copy the pid over to your waiting GDB command and use the provided
`add-symbol-file` command to load debugging information.

Note: the simulator hits two SIGTRAPs before simulation starts.
